
--- Page 1 ---
Chandrakala Trivedi vs State Of Rajasthan & Ors on 12 January,
2012
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2012 SC 488
Bench: T.S. Thakur, Asok Kumar Ganguly
                                                      1
                                                      REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 400  OF 2012
                                (arising out of)
                (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(C) NO.19000 OF 2009)   
         CHANDRAKALA TRIVEDI.                     ...APPELLANT(S)
                                 VERSUS
         STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                .....RESPONDENTS
                                 J U D G M E N T
GANGULY,J Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties. This appeal is directed against the impugned
judgment and order dated 19.01.2009 passed in Special Appeal No. 409 of 2008 of the High Court
of Rajasthan. The controversy arises out of the appellant's appointment to the post of Teacher for
primary and upper primary schools.
The appellant was provisionally selected for appointment to the post of Teacher. The educational
qualification required for appointment to the Level(II) Upper Primary Middle School Section is;
(I)Senior Secondary School Certificate or intermediate or its equivalent; and (II)Diploma or
certificate in elementary teachers training of duration of not less than two years OR Bachelor of
Elementary Education (B.E. Ed.) OR Graduate with Bachelor of Education( B.Ed) or its equivalent"
Chandrakala Trivedi vs State Of Rajasthan & Ors on 12 January, 2012
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138941665/
1

--- Page 2 ---
After the appellant was provisionally selected, she received a letter dated 26.09.2007
from the Rajasthan Public Service Commission informing her that provisional
selection has been cancelled as the appellant did not pass the Higher
Secondary/Senior Secondary Examination after passing the Secondary Examination.
The case of the appellant is that at the time when she passed the Secondary
Examination, it was permissible for a candidate passing the Secondary Examination
to get admission in the higher classes with a preparatory course. The appellant
thereafter completed her graduation from the Indira Gandhi Open University. Then
the appellant got her B.Ed. Degree on a regular basis from Maharishi Dayanand
Saraswati University, Ajmer, Rajasthan. The appellant then also got her M.A degree
from the same University. In that view of the matter, learned counsel for the
appellant submits, that the appellant satisfies the criteria of the required qualification
for appointment to the post in question. The case of the appellant has, however, been
dismissed both by the Single Judge and also by the Division Bench of the High Court,
inter alia, on the ground that as the appellant has not passed the Senior Secondary
Examination, which is the basic qualification for the post in question, the candidature
of the appellant cannot be considered.
We fail to appreciate the aforesaid view taken by the High Court. We find that from
the qualifications which have been mentioned, it is made clear that the basic
qualification is Senior Secondary or Intermediate or its equivalent. We find that the
appellant on the basis of her qualification was provisionally selected after she had
submitted her requisite testimonials.
In the impugned judgment, the High Court has given a finding that the higher
qualification is not the substitute for the qualification of Senior Secondary or
Intermediate. In the instant case, we fail to appreciate the reasoning of the High
Court to the extent that it does not consider higher qualification as equivalent to the
qualification of passing Senior Secondary examination even in respect of a candidate
who was provisionally selected. The word 'equivalent' must be given a reasonable
meaning. By using the expression, 'equivalent' one means that there are some degrees
of flexibility or adjustment which do not lower the stated requirement. There has to
be some difference between what is equivalent and what is exact. Apart from that
after a person is provisionally selected, a certain degree of reasonable expectation of
the selection being continued also comes into existence.
Considering these aspects of the matter, we are of the view that the appellant should
be considered reasonably and the provisional appointment which was given to her
should not be cancelled. We order accordingly.
However, we make it clear that we are passing this order taking in our view the
special facts and circumstances of the case. We hope and expect the respondent
Rajasthan Public Service Commission shall make a suitable recommendation in the
Chandrakala Trivedi vs State Of Rajasthan & Ors on 12 January, 2012
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138941665/
2

--- Page 3 ---
light of the observation in this judgment within four weeks from today and the State,
which is also a party, will make an appointment accordingly within four weeks
thereafter.
The appeal is disposed of. No costs.
.................J (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY) ...................J (T.S. THAKUR) New Delhi;
Dated: JANUARY 12, 2012
Chandrakala Trivedi vs State Of Rajasthan & Ors on 12 January, 2012
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138941665/
3
